 FAQ on coumarin in cinnamon and other foods - BfR Jump directly to the page contents To the homepage of BfR – German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment Search Open search Close search Search Clear search term Search Menu To the homepage of BfR – German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment Metamenü Press Get straight to Open Close Topics A-Z Career Frequently asked questions Publications Research Events Media Library Poisoning reports Product notifications BfR Commissions Bookmarks Entries Basket DE Deutsch Search Open search Close search Search Clear search term Search Area of focus Our topics Open Close Food and feed safety Chemical safety Product safety Risk communication Laboratory Animals Menu Main Menu About us About us Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Overview About us Our institute Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page BfR's Policy Facts & Figures Locations The history of BfR Our mandate Quality Management Environmental Management Principles of Scientific Practice Awards for BfR scientists BfR structure Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Executive committee Executive Bodies Central Department Information Technology and IT Centre Risk Communication Exposure Biological Safety Safety in the Food Chain Pesticides Safety Chemical and Product Safety Food Safety German Centre for the Protection of Laboratory Animals and Experimental Toxicology Institutions at the BfR Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page German Centre for the Protection of Laboratory Animals (Bf3R) The BfR Commissions Reference Laboratories GLP Federal Bureau Scientific Advisory Board EFSA Focal Point Co-operation Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page National European and international Global cooperation Risk assessment Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Guideline risk assessment Glossary Pregnant people Young people Older people Children Food and feed safety Food and feed safety Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Overview Food and feed safety Microbial risks Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Food hygiene Foodborne infections Water reuse Zoonoses Bacteria Viruses Parasites Antibiotic resistance of pathogens on food Use of antibiotics in livestock BSE Feed Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Ingredients in animal feed Residues in feed Additives in animal feed Genetically modified feed Substance risks Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Food ingredients Residues Health assessment of contaminants in food Animal substances Nutritional risks Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Nutritional diseases Special food groups Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Selected foods Genetically modified food and feed Fortified food Food supplements Novel Food Product identity and traceability Product safety Product safety Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Overview Product safety Tattoos Microplastics Textiles Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Chromium Azo dyes Nanomaterials Allergies Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Fragrances Nickel Food contact materials Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Bisphenol A in foods Materials and links to printing inks Material and links to perfluorinated tensides (PFT) PET Phthalates/softeners Kitchen utensils Aluminium Toys Other consumer products Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons Nitrosamines Other commodities Tobacco products Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Shishas E-cigarettes Cosmetics Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Sun protection Fluoride Parabens Chemical safety Chemical safety Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Overview Chemical safety Chemicals under Reach Biocidal products Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Product types Disinsection Chlorpyrifos Legal background Legal procedures of biocidal products Risk assessment Plant protection products Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Legal basis Legal procedures Risk assessment Consumer safety Application safety Exposure estimation for plant protection products Residue analysis Projects International programmes Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Test procedures Transport of dangerous goods Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Transport of packaged goods by sea Packaged goods: Model regulations Product Notifications and Poisonings Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Notification of Detergents and Cleaning Agents Notification of Hazardous Products Voluntary notifications DevTox project Risk communication Risk communication Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Overview Risk communication Social science background Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Early risk detection Risk perception Evaluation of risk communication Health communication Audiovisual Communication Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page BfR Risk Profile Forschperspektive (scientist’s perspective) Podcast ‘Risk’ for the Ears Press Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Press office Press releases Press conference Media library Social Media BfR-Apps Messages from the last 30 days Publications Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Opinions and Communications Scientific reports Specialist publications BfR2GO Children's books BfR science comic Annual reports Brochures Consumer Monitor Leaflets Flyer Posters and cards Educational resources BfR Science Conference and seminar volumes Further publications Research Research Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Overview Research Toxicology Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Nanomaterials Toxic substances QSAR Gene and protein expression analyses Safety factors Biofunctionality Contaminants in food and feed Endocrine disruptors Microbiology Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Food hygiene research Software: rrisk & shiny Antibiotic resistance Analytics Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Authenticity check Research on procuring data for exposure assessment Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Exposure assessment for chemicals and product safety Exposure assessment for textiles, toys and non-textile care items Model parameters for prospective intake estimates Probabilistic exposure assessment KiESEL - The Children's Nutrition Survey to Record Food Consumption The COPLANT Study Research on risk communication Alternative methods to animal testing Science News Research agenda Research funding Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Tendering Fellowship programmes Support for junior scientists Research fields Third party projects of the BfR Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Project Partnership for the Assessment of Risk from Chemicals (PARC) Service Service Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Overview Service Newsletter Topics A-Z Frequently asked questions Veranstaltungen Databases Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page LFGB Data collections Import and Export (IMEX) Database Recommendations on Food Contact Materials Freedom of Information Act (IFG) Working at the BfR Working at the BfR short for German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Overview Working at the BfR Job advertisements Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page IT job advertisements Thesis Career options Open Submenu Close Submenu Contains the current page Trainees Doctoral candidates Scientists Other vocational groups Offers for displaced persons Unsolicited application for internship / Master's thesis / Bachel Why working at the BfR is attractive Get to know us! Breadcrumb BfR - EN | Service | Frequently asked questions | FAQ coumarin Back Category FAQ 27/09/2012 FAQ on coumarin in cinnamon and other foods Note Article not noticed Click to add to the watch list. Noticed Article noticed Click to remove from the watch list. Share article Copy URL What it's about: Coumarin is a flavouring substance which is contained in relatively high concentrations in cinnamon varieties collectively known as "Cassia cinnamon". In especially sensitive persons, even comparatively small quantities of coumarin can cause liver damage, although the effect is usually reversible. Isolated coumarin must not be added to foods. However, to flavour foods, coumarin-containing plant parts may be used. For cinnamon-containing foods, new maximum permissible coumarin levels have been in place in the European Union since 2011. In contrast, there are no limit values for cinnamon as a spice. Consumers who take cinnamon-based food supplements should be aware that such products may contain high quantities of Cassia cinnamon. The BfR short for German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment recommends moderate consumption of Cassia cinnamon. Consumers who frequently use large amounts of cinnamon as spice in their home cooking, for example for rice pudding with sugar and cinnamon, should use Ceylon cinnamon which contains low levels of coumarin. The BfR short for German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment has updated FAQ on coumarin and cinnamon. Download information Read Entire document Download: Download [AUTO-DE] FAQ on coumarin in cinnamon and other foods (PDF, 33 KB, not accessible) [Accordion] FAQ on coumarin in cinnamon and other foods Expand all Close all What is coumarin and where is it found? Open content Close content Coumarin is a natural flavouring and fragrant substance contained in many plants. It is contained in relatively high concentrations in varieties of cinnamon collectively known as “Cassia cinnamon” and also, for example, in woodruff, tonka beans and melilot. What is coumarin used for? Open content Close content Synthetically produced coumarin is used in cosmetic products; it smells of fresh hay. In addition, coumarin is used in medicine as a drug for treating oedemas. Isolated coumarin must not be added to foods. If it is contained in parts of plants added to foods to flavour them (as is the case with cinnamon), the coumarin quantity is, according to the new European aroma law, restricted for certain cinnamon-containing foods. How much coumarin does cinnamon contain? Open content Close content A rough distinction into two types of cinnamon can be made: Ceylon cinnamon only contains low levels of coumarin which in the opinion of the BfR short for German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment are safe in terms of their health effects. Cassia cinnamon contains higher levels of coumarin. For this reason, it is not advisable to consume large quantities of it over prolonged periods of time. Are there limit values for coumarin in foods? Open content Close content The new European flavouring regulation lays down limit values for cinnamon-containing foods. Thus the maximum content for “traditional and / or seasonal bakery ware containing a reference to cinnamon in the labelling” (for example cinnamon stars) is 50 mg short for milligram (milligrams) per kg short for kilogram of food. For desserts (for example rice pudding with cinnamon), the limit is 5 mg short for milligram per kg short for kilogram of food. The new limit values have been in place since January 2011. The old European flavouring regulation of 1988 specified a stricter limit value of 2 mg short for milligram per kg short for kilogram of food for foodstuffs generally. That strict value was laid down at the time because the development of cancer resulting from small intake quantities could not be ruled out. However, more recent scientific studies show that this concern was unfounded. Are there limit values for coumarin in cinnamon? Open content Close content No limit value currently exists for coumarin in cinnamon. The new European flavouring regulation does not lay down any general limit values for natural ingredients contained in herbs and spices. Is too much coumarin potentially detrimental to human health? Open content Close content The use of coumarin for medicinal purposes has shown that even relatively low doses can lead to liver damage in a small group of especially sensitive persons, if the drug is administered for a few weeks. In mild cases, this leads to an increase of liver enzymes in the blood. In severe cases, it results in inflammation of the liver which can manifest as jaundice. The precise mechanism leading to these symptoms is not known. However, the effects are usually reversible. In contrast, no such cases of liver damage following consumption of cinnamon have been described in the scientific literature to date. Can coumarin provoke cancer? Open content Close content In animal experiments, very large doses of coumarin administered over long periods of time did provoke cancer in rats and mice. For humans, however, there are no indications that tumours may be triggered by coumarin. How does the BfR assess the health risk posed by coumarin in cinnamon? Open content Close content The BfR short for German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment has assessed the health risk that may be posed by coumarin in foods. It emerged that in animal experiments and when administered to sensitive persons as a drug, coumarin could damage the liver. For this reason, the BfR short for German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment then derived a tolerable daily intake ( TDI short for Tolerable Daily Intake ). This is the amount that a person can ingest daily over a lifetime without appreciable health risk.  The TDI short for Tolerable Daily Intake is 0.1 mg short for milligram (milligrams) of coumarin per kg short for kilogram of bodyweight and day and it also applies to especially sensitive consumers. This means that an adult with a body weight of 60 kg short for kilogram can consume 6 mg short for milligram of coumarin every day for the rest of their life without any noticeable health impairment. The European Food Safety Authority has calculated the same value in its assessment of coumarin. If this value is exceeded in the short run, this does not pose any health risks. How high are coumarin levels in cinnamon as a spice? Open content Close content Data of food monitoring shows that Cassia cinnamon on average contains approximately 3000 mg short for milligram (3 g) of coumarin per kg short for kilogram of cinnamon. However, the highest measured levels were as high as 10000 mg short for milligram (10 g) of coumarin per kg short for kilogram of Cassia cinnamon. How much coumarin is contained in cinnamon-containing foods? Open content Close content The studies conducted by the food control authorities in 2006 revealed that the maximum coumarin level of 2 mg short for milligram per kg short for kilogram of food in force back then was clearly exceeded. Thus in cinnamon stars, for example, up to over 100 mg short for milligram per kg short for kilogram of food were detected. Following the public debate in the year 2006, food manufacturers guaranteed compliance with the old maximum level still applicable at the time by changing their recipes and by taking other measures. It is not currently known how far below food manufacturers have, since 2011, stayed below the new coumarin limit values for cinnamon-containing foods. Does the consumption of cinnamon-containing foods pose a risk for consumers? Open content Close content It is only possible to exceed the tolerable daily intake with food alone, if the limit value of 50 mg short for milligram per kg short for kilogram of food is reached completely and if large amounts of such foods are eaten on a daily basis. For small children with a body weight of 15 kg short for kilogram , the TDI short for Tolerable Daily Intake would be reached if they ate 30 g of cinnamon stars (about 6 small cinnamon stars) or 100 g of ginger bread cake every day, provided that no other coumarin exposure Close dialog exposure Exposure To glossary from other sources occurs. For adults (with a body weight of 60 kg short for kilogram ) this equals more than 120 g of cinnamon stars (about 24 small cinnamon stars) per day. As with other foods, the BfR short for German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment recommends consumption in moderation. It must be borne in mind in this context that coumarin can additionally enter the body via cosmetic products such as coumarin-containing body lotions and body oils. Does the ingestion of cinnamon as spice pose a risk to consumers? Open content Close content Since slight exceeding of the TDI short for Tolerable Daily Intake for one to two weeks can be seen as safe, a health risk for consumers is only possible, if they eat very large amounts of Cassia cinnamon with high coumarin contents over an extended period of time. An adult with a body weight of 60 kg short for kilogram reaches the TDI short for Tolerable Daily Intake by consuming about 2 g of Cassia cinnamon per day. A small child with a body weight of 15 kg short for kilogram reaches its TDI short for Tolerable Daily Intake by ingesting about 0.5 g of Cassia cinnamon (see photo). If, for example, a small child eats rice pudding with sugar and cinnamon as a main meal twice a week, each time with 0.5 g of cinnamon (coumarin content: 3000 mg short for milligram per kg short for kilogram of cinnamon), he or she only reaches 29 % of the TDI short for Tolerable Daily Intake . Those who frequently use large amounts of cinnamon as a spice in their home cooking, for example for rice pudding with sugar and cinnamon, should make sure that they use Ceylon cinnamon which is low in coumarin. How can the consumer distinguish between Ceylon cinnamon and Cassia cinnamon? Open content Close content If the cinnamon is in powder form, it is hardly possible for consumers to tell Ceylon cinnamon and Cassia cinnamon apart. However, there are products that explicitly state the type of cinnamon as “Ceylon cinnamon” on the packaging. Cinnamon sticks are rather different: whereas for Cassia cinnamon, a relative thick outer layer forms a small roll, the cross-section of a Ceylon cinnamon stick resembles a cut cigar - several fine rolled-up layers make up the cinnamon stick, resulting in a relatively densely packed cross section. Does the ingestion of cinnamon as a food supplement pose a risk to the consumer? Open content Close content Consumers taking cinnamon-based food supplements should be aware that these products may contain high levels of coumarin. The coumarin content of cinnamon supplements varies and depends on the type of cinnamon used as well as the way it is processed. If Cassia cinnamon powder is taken, consumers may, depending on the recommended dose, exceed the TDI short for Tolerable Daily Intake . Expand all Close all Our newsletters The BfR short for German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment offers you various newsletters in German and English. Subscribe To the top To the homepage of Footer Meta-Navigation Press General Terms and Conditions Contact Legal notice Data Protection Declaration Accessibility Statement Follow us External Link: Linkedin External Link: Instagram External Link: X External Link: Mastodon External Link: Threads External Link: Bluesky External Link: Youtube External Link: Podcast © Copyright German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment 2026 