 
 
 
Feeding Issues in Individuals with CdLS 
 
By Cheri S. Carrico, Ph.D., CCC‐SLP, CdLS Foundation Clinical Advisory Board 
Member 
 
Many individuals with CdLS experience feeding concerns at some point in their lives. 
Challenges can include food aversions; being a messy, slow, or picky eater; eating 
limited varieties and small amounts of food; taking very small bites; spitting food out; 
and refusing to eat. On occasion, however, some individuals “stuff” food in their 
mouths. 
 
There are a variety of factors that impact feeding, including gastroesophageal reflux 
disease (GERD), low muscle tone in and around the mouth, a small jaw 
(micrognathia), oral defensiveness, and aspiration of food or liquids. Symptoms of oral 
feeding difficulties include choking, coughing, gagging, vomiting, a “gargly” sounding 
voice after feeding, aspiration, and food aversions. 
 
Infants with CdLS may have difficulty sucking or coordinating sucking, swallowing 
and breathing. Some difficulties may not be observed until infants are a few months 
old, when anatomical changes in the mouth and neck may make it difficult to control 
food to swallow it safely. Other challenges become present as children move from 
formula to solid foods. 
 
Approximately 90 percent of individuals with CdLS experience GERD. These 
symptoms include spitting up or vomiting during or following meals, as well as 
pain or discomfort associated with feeding. Consequently, individuals affected by 
GERD may develop feeding aversions. Food aversions also are frequent among 
individuals with a history of tube feeding. When children are tube fed, the tube 
feedings bypass the need for oral feeding and can result in a lack of exposure to a 
variety of tastes, textures, temperatures, smells, and food presentations that provide 
oral stimulation and make meal times a pleasant, social experience. 
 
In addition, individuals who are tube fed may be fed in places, such as bedrooms, 
or at times, such as during the night, that are not typically associated with feeding 
experiences. Thus, it’s essential to provide individuals who are tube fed with 
opportunities to experience both the oral and social stimulation associated with meals. 
 
Individuals who exhibit feeding challenges should be referred to a speech‐language 
pathologist, and medical clearance should be obtained prior to initiating oral feeding. 
Individuals with swallowing difficulties, such as coughing, choking, or gagging during 
meals, typically are recommended for a swallow evaluation. The evaluation will 
determine whether aspiration, the accidental sucking in of food particles or fluids into 
the lungs, occurs. If no aspiration is evident, it’s probably safe to feed orally. If 
there is aspiration, modifications such as thickening of liquids or pureeing of solids 

 
 
may be recommended. Liquids may be thickened with baby cereals, baby foods, 
oatmeal, flour, corn starch, yogurt, applesauce, and commercially available thickeners. 
Soft pieces of pasta, rice, potatoes, cooked vegetables, and canned fruit may 
gradually be added to provide textures that are relatively easy to manage. Gradually 
increase the number of pieces and the firmness of the pieces before moving to 
firmer foods, such as bread, soft breadsticks, medium cooked vegetables, lunch meats, 
and fish sticks. Eventually, transition to firm solids, including apples (they may initially 
need to be peeled or cut into slices), carrots, meats, teething biscuits, crackers, 
pretzels, granola bars, and so forth. Remember to proceed in small, gradual steps as 
broader food preferences are encouraged. 
 
No oral feeding should occur unless medical clearance is obtained for individuals 
with a history of feeding difficulties. If oral feeding is contraindicated, oral 
stimulation should still be provided, using a variety of tastes (sweet, salty, spicy, 
sour, bland), textures (smooth, bumpy, soft, firm, “squishy”), and temperatures (warm, 
room, cool, cold, and frozen). 
 
Taste stimulation can be provided by adding objects to a child’s hands, such as traces of 
food or liquid, toys, pacifier, toothbrush, cloth baby book, teething ring, and wash 
cloth, or by putting solid foods in a safety feeder (a small device with a mesh bag 
attached to a solid plastic ring, available where baby feeding items are sold). To 
provide temperature stimulation, appropriate items can be placed in the freezer or 
refrigerator, warmed in the microwave oven or in warm water, and so forth. Texture 
stimulation should be provided by utilizing items of various textures, such as those 
described, as well commercially available “chewy tubes” and refrigerator tubing. 
 
Initially introduce only one stimulus (taste, texture or temperature) at a time, if a child 
has a history of feeding aversions. Once each is reasonably well tolerated, stimuli 
can be combined, for example, by trying cold applesauce that previously was 
tolerated at room temperature. Also stimulate the oral area using deep touch. The lips, 
cheeks, and chin can be strengthened by applying firm pressure and massage. 
Strengthen the tongue by applying pressure with a finger down the center of the 
tongue and by gently pulling on the tongue and shaking it, while holding it with a 
wash cloth. These techniques may also reduce oral defensiveness and lead to better 
oral feeding skills. Be sure to engage your child in a very playful manner. 
 
Ultimately, every attempt should be made to keep feeding social, enjoyable, and fun. 
 
