 Caloric-Intake Archives | CdLS Foundation WHAT IS CdLS? Characteristics of CdLS Diagnosis of CdLS Frequently Asked Questions Critical Care Información en Español Know your Genes WHO WE ARE Centers for Excellence CdLS Heroes Meet Our Team Our History WHO WE HELP Families Professionals Research GET INVOLVED Raise Awareness Calendar of Events Special Events Host a Fundraiser Media Room CONTACT US DONATE Select Page Caloric Intake What would be a sufficient daily caloric intake for a CdLS child? We have had several nutritionists express their concern regarding our son’s daily caloric intake (approx. 400 calories per day). They have suggested a feeding tube to increase his daily caloric intake. Do you think this is necessary, and approximately how many calories should a CdLS child the size of our son be taking in per day? These estimations are best done by the physician caring for the child, but likely this child needs about 600 calories per day. If the slope of the growth curve is not adequate, then an evaluation for GI anomalies, nutrition consult, and probably tube feeding are all appropriate. They should see a pediatric gastroenterologist to have her/him assist with this decision. DP /TK 7-13-10 Legal Disclaimer: Please take note that the CdLS Foundation’s Ask the Expert service is comprised of volunteer professionals in various areas of focus. Response times may vary and a response is not guaranteed. Answers are not considered a medical, behavioral, or educational consultation. Ask the Expert is not a substitute for the care and attention your child’s personal physician, psychologist, educational consultant, or social worker can deliver.   Answer Published On: October 18th, 2018 8:32 PM Need Immediate Help or Support? Call us: 1.800.753.2357 About Us Meet the Staff Board of Directors CdLS Experts 990 & Annual Report Blog Resources Webinars Critical Care CdLS Publications Ask the Expert Bereavement Services Get Involved Team CdLS Attend a Family Gathering Raise Awareness Host a Fundraiser Become a Volunteer Support Us Monthly Giving Corporate Giving/Sponsorships Matching Gifts Planned Giving 30 Tower Lane, Suite 400 . Avon, Connecticut 06001 USA 2021. All rights Reserved. Terms & Conditions . Privacy Policy . EIN: 06-1057497 Facebook X Website Design by IMPACT × 