 
 
Nutritional Survey Results 
by Loretta Harvey, M.S., R.D., C.S.N.C., L.D.N., University of Maryland 
Hospital for Children and CdLS Foundation Clinical Advisory Board 
Member 
 
Nutrition plays a vital role in the growth and development of children. For 
children with CdLS, obtaining proper nutrition may be an obstacle due to 
challenges associated with the syndrome. 
To better understand the nutritional issues associated with CdLS, the 
Foundation surveyed parents about nutritional complications and 
challenges. 
The questions addressed issues found to be more prevalent in people with 
CdLS when compared to those unaffected by the syndrome. The areas 
addressed by the study included growth concerns, feeding issues, food 
allergies/intolerances, and gastrointestinal issues. Two hundred and two 
parents/caregivers completed the online survey in the summer of 2011. 
This article reviews some of the results from the survey. 
Growth  Concerns 
For those with CdLS, specific growth curves are available to determine if 
a child’s growth is appropriate when compared to others with CdLS. 
These CdLS gender-specific growth charts are based on research and data 
collected over many years. 
When asked about the growth of their child, approximately 75 percent 
indicated that their child’s growth was not normal. Comments from 
parents showed that many of their children were smaller than their peers 
in both weight and height, but were appropriate when plotted on the 
CdLS curve. 
Many indicated that their child’s weight gain was slow during early years 
but picked up as he/she got older, even resulting in excessive weight 
gain. 
A follow-up question asking about weight gain showed that 35 percent of 
individuals experienced periods of excessive weight gain. Overeating, 
medication and lack of physical activity played a large role in 
contributing to this weight gain. Most reported that the initial period of 
weight gain occurred during adolescence. 
 
 
 

 
 
Feeding Issues 
The majority of people with CdLS are able to consume at least part of 
their nutritional requirements by mouth. Out of those surveyed, nine 
percent of children could not eat anything by mouth, 17 percent had 
limited oral intakes and 43 percent required tube feedings (either ongoing 
or at one point in the past). 
Tube feeding was required due to gastroesophageal reflux, poor weight 
gain, small jaw and other anatomical difficulties, swallowing 
dysfunction, cleft palate, or a combination of factors. 
For those who required a feeding tube due to gastroesophageal reflux, 60 
percent received a Nissen fundoplication (surgical procedure used to treat 
reflux). 
Most children on tube feedings were able to tolerate a milk-based intact 
formula, but others required semi- elemental or free amino acid-based 
specialty formulas due to poor tolerance to intact proteins. For those that 
did not require tube feeds, 36 percent required oral nutritional 
supplements and/or additional vitamin/mineral supplements to meet 
nutritional needs. 
At least half of those surveyed indicated feeding issues and/or food 
aversions that prevented appropriate oral intakes for growth. Those 
surveyed reported that 46 percent of their children had sensory or texture 
issues associated with eating; 51 percent required some type of oral 
motor therapy or other feeding therapy; and 32 percent had issues with 
food storage in the mouth. 
Food  allergies/intolerances 
Food allergies were reported by 16 percent of those who responded. 
Twenty six percent indicated the child had either a milk protein allergy or 
lactose intolerance. Other food allergies listed were corn, rye, seafood, 
peanuts, tree nuts, soy, berries, egg, citrus, and wheat. 
For those whose children had lactose intolerance, most reported limiting 
dairy intake or using lactaid pills when dairy products were consumed. 
Gastrointestinal  Issues 
Diarrhea, constipation and gastroesophageal reflux are common issues in 
people with CdLS. Of those who answered the survey, 69 percent 
indicated their child deals with constipation either frequently or 
sometimes; 49 percent indicated their child experiences diarrhea. 
 

 
 
Many parents whose children deal with constipation use Miralax, a stool 
softener or Milk of Magnesia to aid bowel regularity, while others use 
more natural methods such as increasing fiber and fluid intake or by 
giving prunes daily. Still others improve constipation by increasing 
physical activity or doing a combination of methods. 
Out of those who reported diarrhea, 10 percent indicated it occurred 
frequently. Many use Imodium to control symptoms. 
Although a specific question on reflux was not included in the study, 
about one third of caregivers whose child ruminated (brings food back up 
into the mouth after swallowing) believed the rumination was due to 
reflux. 
Parents reported that these symptoms improved with surgery (Nissen 
fundoplication) or with acid- blocking medication. Others modified the 
child’s diet by avoiding spicy, acidic and fatty foods, chocolate, and 
caffeine to prevent symptoms of reflux and rumination. 
If you have concerns about your child’s nutrition, speak with his/her 
doctor or contact the CdLS Foundation at 800-753-2357 or through the 
Ask the Expert service at www.CdLSusa.org. 
 
 
