PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • FEBRUARY 2011
16
Nutritional Assessment and 
Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
INTRODUCTION
I
ndividuals with cerebral palsy (CP) present unusual
challenges to dietitians when presenting to an acute
care setting. Short stature, scoliosis, and oral-motor
difficulties are some of the unique characteristics to
consider in nutritional assessment and intervention
(see Table 1). Children with special health care needs
(CSHCN) typically have a “Medical Home,” which is
usually a pediatrician or family practice physician who
provides routine pediatric care and care coordination
of the multiple specialists the child sees (3). In adult-
hood, the family physician or internist usually contin-
ues this practice, or in some instances, the caregivers
must coordinate the individual’s specialty care. 
Caregivers usually have medical records contain-
ing assessments from an interdisciplinary team, which
may include follow up recommendations and guide-
lines for monitoring nutritional status. If a registered
dietitian has previously followed an individual, it can
be very helpful to contact them for background infor-
mation and recommendations. Individuals with CP may
be unable to communicate; therefore, caregivers pro-
vide important information for a nutrition assessment. 
In clinical practice, the Subjective Global Assess-
ment technique (4) is not a good assessment tool for
most individuals with disabilities, as the body habitus
is not considered in this assessment. However, a phys-
NUTRITION ISSUES IN GASTROENTEROLOGY, SERIES #92
Wendy Wittenbrook, MA, RD, CSP, LD, Clinical 
Dietitian, Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children,
Dallas, TX.
Carol Rees Parrish, R.D., M.S., Series Editor
Advances in medical care have resulted in a longer lifespan of individuals with cerebral
palsy, with many surviving and thriving through adulthood.  Individuals with cerebral
palsy can have nutritional issues that may significantly impact their health, growth, and
development. As children with cerebral palsy “age out” of the pediatric system, adult
practitioners may be unfamiliar with the nutrition-related problems that can present in
this challenging population. Medical issues, such as wounds, illness, or surgery, are typ-
ically the primary focus in the acute care setting. The ultimate goal in nutritional inter-
vention should be to optimize health, fitness, growth, and function in individuals with
cerebral palsy.  Nutritional assessment, intervention, and monitoring of individuals with
cerebral palsy are discussed in this article, along with special considerations.
(continued on page 21)
Wendy Wittenbrook

PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • FEBRUARY 2011
21
NUTRITION ISSUES IN GASTROENTEROLOGY, SERIES #92
Nutritional Assessment and Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
ical assessment is important to identify signs and
symptoms of dehydration and malnutrition.  Tobin et
al. (5) have summarized potential feeding and nutrition
problems for a variety of developmental disorders.
Although this resource focuses on CSHCN, it also pro-
vides information regarding oral motor problems typi-
cally seen in children and adults with special health
care needs. Please see references 1 and 2 for informa-
tion on in-depth evaluation and Table 2 for additional
practitioner resources.  
NUTRITIONAL ASSESSMENT
ANTHROPOMETRICS: CLINIC VS ACUTE CARE
Stature Measurement 
Short stature can result from an underlying diagnosis
and/or nutritional stunting in childhood. Changes due
to scoliosis, spasticity, contractures, and/or limb differ-
ences may even make the individual appear to “shrink”
over time. Once maximum adult stature has been
achieved, increasing energy and protein intake will not
(continued from page 16)
Table 1.  
Common Challenges seen in Individuals with Cerebral
Palsy and Other Developmental Disabilities1,2
Parameter
Challenges 
Growth
• Underweight
• Overweight
• Short stature
Mobility
• Ambulatory
• Nonambulatory
• Power/manual wheelchair
• Assistive devices
Dysphagia
• Oropharyngeal
• Esophageal
Muscle tone
• Hypertonia
• Hypotonia
Alternative/ 
• Side effects
Complementary 
• Drug-nutrient interactions
Medicine
Feeding
• Oral
• Enteral
• Parenteral
GI
• Gastroesophageal reflux
• Dysmotility
• Dumping syndrome
• Malrotation
• Diarrhea/constipation
Orthopaedic
• Contactures
• Scoliosis
• Dislocated hips
• Osteopenia
Medications
• Drug-nutrient interactions
• Side effects on muscle tone, 
bowels, appetite
Pulmonary status
• Effects on energy expenditure
Table 2.  
Additional Resources for Dietitians
Professional Organizations
• American Academy of Cerebral Palsy and Developmen-
tal Medicine
• American Dietetic Association
– Behavioral Health Nutrition Practice Group
– Pediatric Nutrition Practice Group (Children with
Special Health Care Needs Special Interest Group)
Government Organizations
• National Institute of Child Health and Human Develop-
ment (NICHD), Division of Services for Children with
Special Health Needs
• Department of Health and Human Services (state level)
Conferences
• Advances in Pediatric Nutrition
• American Academy of Cerebral Palsy and 
Developmental Medicine
Publications
(in addition to References at end of article)
• Cricco K and Holland M. Nutrition Assessment 
Guidelines for Children with Special Health Care Needs.
NUTRITION FOCUS Newsletter. 2007; 22(3):1–11.
• Lucas BL, Feucht SA, Grieger LE, editors. Children with
Special Health Care Needs: Nutrition Care Handbook.
American Dietetic Association; 2004.

PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • FEBRUARY 2011
22
NUTRITION ISSUES IN GASTROENTEROLOGY, SERIES #92
Nutritional Assessment and Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
increase stature. An accurate measurement of stature is
necessary to determine an appropriate weight for
height (also known as ideal body weight) and in calcu-
lating energy and protein needs for individuals with
CP. Accuracy can be affected by contractures, scolio-
sis, or abnormally formed body structures. 
In the clinic setting, practitioners use a variety of
measurement techniques to assess stature. Canda has
developed equations to estimate stature through the
use of body segment lengths that may be used in adults
with developmental disabilities (6). Knee height (1),
upper arm length (1), recumbent length (7), or tibial
length (8) are techniques used to estimate stature.
Orthopaedic deformities and contractures make arm
span and sitting height measurements difficult and
impractical to obtain in individuals with CP. The use of
a measuring tape to measure along the contours of a
reclining individual is not accurate and should be
avoided. Measurement techniques should be used con-
sistently and follow a facility’s protocol. 
A stature measurement should be obtained on each
acute admission for adults with CP, as changes in spas-
ticity, scoliosis, and contractures may affect measure-
ments. Children with CP should have a stature
measurement upon hospital admission and monthly
thereafter. 
Weight
In individuals with CP, weight does not reflect the typ-
ical distribution of body fat and muscle; therefore, cal-
culating body mass index (BMI) is not useful for
estimating appropriate weight for height. Fat stores are
typically depleted (9–11) and muscle stores are low
compared to norms (9–10). These alterations in body
composition should be considered when estimating
energy needs. For example, if a hypometabolic indi-
vidual has low muscle stores but high fat stores (as evi-
denced by skinfold measurements), increasing energy
intake will not lead to muscle mass, as demonstrated
by Ohata et al. (12).
An accurate weight may be difficult to obtain, par-
ticularly if bed, table, or wheelchair scales are not
available. Standing scales may be used to weigh indi-
viduals who are able to bear weight. Here are a few
considerations to remember when obtaining weights
and patients with CP:
• A consistent scale should be used when obtaining
weights. 
• Outpatient weights should be obtained at least twice
a year, and inpatient weights should be measured
weekly.  
• Scales must be zeroed out before each measurement. 
• Individuals should be weighed in light clothing, with
a dry diaper (if incontinent), and without shoes and
braces.
Assessment of Stature and Weight
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) growth charts
(13) should be used for children and adults less than
five feet tall and the Hamwi method (14) should be
used for individuals over five feet tall to estimate the
appropriate weight for height. Some practitioners use
the 50th percentile BMI/age to determine the ideal
body weight/appropriate weight for height; however,
this assumes an accurate height and the typical distrib-
ution of fat and muscle. Disability-specific growth
charts are available to assess “typical” growth of vari-
ous syndromes, but small sample sizes, age ranges,
and the lack of availability in an acute care setting tend
to limit their use. When plotting individuals up to age
20 on the CDC growth charts, the goal is to have
appropriate growth velocity and for the child to follow
their growth curve, even when measurements are con-
sistently below the 5th percentile.
Skinfold Measurements
Skinfold measurements are a quick and easy method to
assess an individual’s body habitus, and these tech-
niques have been previously described in detail in ref-
erences 1 and 2. The measurements may be interpreted
using percentiles published by Frisancho (15),
although these were based on a Caucasian population
without disabilities. Although fat stores are usually
low compared to norms in individuals with CP (9–11),
severely disabled individuals tend to have more typical
fat stores similar to nondisabled individuals (11). 
A single skinfold measurement is not useful to esti-
mate percentage of body fat in individuals with CP.
Clinical practice has found serial skin fold measure-
ments over time using the individual as their own con-
trol is the best use of these measurements. Triceps skin

PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • FEBRUARY 2011
23
NUTRITION ISSUES IN GASTROENTEROLOGY, SERIES #92
Nutritional Assessment and Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
fold measurements (TSF) less than 10th percentile have
been validated as a reliable screening tool for depleted
fat stores in this population (9), and, for these individ-
uals, the appropriate (ideal) weight for height should be
used for calculating energy and protein needs. Actual
body weight may be used in individuals with TSF
between the 25th and 90th percentile, and adjusted
body weight may be used in obese individuals.  
DETERMINING NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Energy
Disability specific standards for estimating energy
needs in children with CP are available, (2); however,
they are often of limited use due to small sample size,
limited age ranges studied and the necessity of an accu-
rate stature measurement. For example, one formula
used for CP is: 5–11 years old—14 kcal/cm if ambula-
tory; 11 kcal/cm if nonambulatory (16). Standards for
adults with disabilities are not available. The typical
use of prediction equations can overestimate energy
needs in CSHCN by as much as 20% (17), and Vernon-
Roberts et al. (18) have shown appropriate growth in
children with CP with 75% of estimated energy needs
via enteral feedings.  No two individuals with cerebral
palsy are alike; some individuals may be hypometabo-
lic as a result of hypotonia, while others may be hyper-
metabolic related to increased muscle tone. The DRI
equation for calculating energy needs (19) may be most
useful in the acute setting, as it can be adjusted or “tai-
lored” to meet a patient’s needs by adding in Physical
Activity Coefficients. Adjustments may be made for
higher energy needs, such as wound healing or posto-
perative healing. Energy needs may also be based on
the energy intake of the typical diet, with adjustments
made for current medical status. It is not uncommon to
see a hypometabolic individual with CP who is able to
maintain their weight on a very low calorie level. If an
individual with CP is admitted to an acute care facility
on a nutritional regimen that seems unusually low or
high in calories based on a facility’s protocol equations,
clinicians should resist the temptation to change it.
Most likely, the individual has been followed regularly
by a dietitian that is quite familiar with them, and this
regimen may be the one that has worked out of many
months of trial and error. If the individual is doing well,
they should remain on their preadmission nutritional
regimen. The recommended changes based on a faci-
lity’s protocol may seem like a simple change to the in-
patient staff; however, this may cause significant upset
to the individual and family.
The effect of medications on energy expenditure is
important to consider. For example, individuals with
hypertonia that use medications such as Artane®
(Trihexyphenidyl) or Lioresal® (Baclofen) to reduce
muscle tone often have a reduction in their energy
expenditure; therefore, weight should be closely moni-
tored and energy intake adjusted to prevent undesira-
ble weight changes. Antipsychotic medications, such
as Risperdal® (Risperidone) have been noted to result
in excessive weight gain resulting from the side effect
of increased appetite.
Protein
Protein needs are estimated using the RDA/DRI and
actual weight or appropriate weight for height (if
<90% or >125% appropriate weight for height). There
are no guidelines for estimating protein needs of indi-
viduals with disabilities under stress such as surgery.
Protein intake has been increased up to 1.5–2 g/kg/day
in clinical practice for presurgical/postsurgical plan-
ning and wound healing with normal renal status.  
Estimating Fluid Requirements
Determining fluid needs is an important step in assess-
ment, as many individuals with CP have fluid loss
through sialorrhea or sweating, and are unable to con-
(continued on page 28)
Table 3.  
Calculating Fluid Needs20
Weight
Calculation
1–10 kg
100 mL/kg
10–20 kg
1000 mL + 50 mL/kg for each kg
above 10 kg
>20 kg
1500 mL + 20 mL/kg for each kg
above 20 kg 

PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • FEBRUARY 2011
28
NUTRITION ISSUES IN GASTROENTEROLOGY, SERIES #92
Nutritional Assessment and Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
sume adequate quantities of fluids and/or communicate
thirst. Actual body weight is used to estimate fluid needs
using the Holliday-Segar equation (Table 3). However,
the calculated fluid needs may not be realistic; therefore,
in clinical practice, a goal of 90% of “ideal” fluid intake
is more feasible. The often used rule of thumb of 1 mL
of fluid per 1 kilocalorie (21) may underestimate the
fluid needs of individuals who are hypometabolic.
CONSIDERATION OF SPECIAL ISSUES
GI Issues
Gastrointestinal issues are prevalent in individuals
with CP and should be considered during a nutrition
assessment. The underlying neurologic impairment in
cerebral palsy can affect the gastrointestinal system,
most notably oral-motor function and motility (espe-
cially colonic, which typically results in constipation).
The possibility of autoimmune diseases, such as celiac
disease, food allergy, or eosinophilic esophagitis
should also be considered.
Dysphagia/Oral Motor Dysfunction
Every individual with CP should be screened for dys-
phagia, for it commonly presents as a sequelae of the
underlying damage to the central nervous system. Dys-
phagia in CP typically presents as a history of feeding
difficulties, extended feeding times, malnutrition, and/or
a history of aspiration pneumonia (22). More severe
oral-motor dysfunction is seen with increased severity of
the disability (23,24). Medications used to reduce mus-
cle tone can also increase dysphagia risk (23). For exam-
ple, severe dysphagia has resulted from Botox injections
of the salivary gland for sialorrhea treatment, as
observed in clinical practice. See Table 4 for additional
signs/symptoms of dysphagia in addition to obvious dif-
ficulty with oral feedings. As the population of individu-
als with CP ages, dysphagia can worsen or can present as
a new diagnosis after a stroke or other central nervous
system damage that occurs with aging (23). Screening
for dysphagia should be done at each clinic visit, as well
as when a patient presents to an acute care unit (23,24).
Constipation
Dysmotility, hypotonia, medications, and nonambula-
tion contribute to constipation. Medications commonly
used in this population that can cause constipation
include 
Artane®
(Trihexyphenidyl), 
Robinul®
(Glycopyrrolate), Valium® (Diazepam), or narcotics.
Veugelers et al. (25) found more than half of children
with CP in their study had constipation. A higher inci-
dence was seen in individuals with a more severe dis-
ability and those who took medications contributing to
constipation. Despite laxative treatment, one-third of
individuals were still constipated. Although the authors
found increasing fluid and fiber intake had no signifi-
cant effect (25), clinical practice has found increasing
fluid intake to 90% of fluid needs can help manage con-
stipation in CP. The DRI for fiber is typically used to
determine fiber recommendations (19); however, this
may not be realistic due to food choices in individuals
with CP, although fiber supplements may be helpful.
Ensuring adequate fluid intake prior to increasing fiber
intake can help prevent additional problems with con-
stipation. Adjusting fluid and/or fiber intake does not
always improve constipation, and increasing fiber can
sometimes worsen constipation; therefore, medical
management is frequently required. Pain from consti-
pation may be confused with pain in other areas, par-
ticularly hip pain. A kidney, ureters, and bladder (KUB)
x-ray can be helpful to assess constipation to assist in
decision making for medical management of constipa-
tion. A patient’s normal stool habits should be noted
and their typical bowel regimen continued while in the
acute care unit unless contraindicated. 
Dysmotility
Issues with dysmotility can present in several forms:
dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD),
(continued from page 23)
Table 4.  
Additional “Red Flags” for Dysphagia 
in Cerebral Palsy24
• Recurrent respiratory infections
• Constipation
• Hiatal hernia
• Gastroesophageal reflux disease
• Scoliosis
• Epilepsy

PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • FEBRUARY 2011
29
NUTRITION ISSUES IN GASTROENTEROLOGY, SERIES #92
Nutritional Assessment and Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
delayed gastric emptying and dumping syndrome (22).
The diagnosis and treatment of these issues can make
feedings more pleasurable and better tolerated in addi-
tion to promoting positive weight gain. Proton pump
inhibitors such as Prilosec® and Prevacid® are often
prescribed for treatment of GERD. Prokinetic drugs
(Metoclopramide®) and positioning changes can be
used to improve gastric motility. The feeding regimen
can be changed by increasing or decreasing the infusion
rate and/or formula volume to help promote gastric
emptying and improve feeding tolerance. Sometimes,
nighttime feedings may need to be changed to daytime
feedings to assist with motility. Caregivers should
always be involved in any discussions regarding
changes in a feeding regimen, as they will be responsi-
ble for administering the feedings after discharge. A
Nissen fundoplication or a conversion from gastros-
tomy to gastrojejunostomy can be done in more severe
cases of GERD; however, a Nissen fundoplication does
increase the risk of dumping syndrome. 
Spinal Abnormalities
Neuromuscular scoliosis is present in many individuals
with CP (7). Scoliosis progression can result in dimin-
ished gastric capacity, GERD, difficulty in positioning
for feedings, and changes in motility that can cause early
satiety, nausea, and vomiting. Pulmonary compromise
related to scoliosis can also increase energy expenditure.
Clinical practice has found previously undiagnosed mal-
rotation and/or volvulus when individuals continue to
have difficulty with feedings and weight gain. Individu-
als with CP who have postoperative weight loss are at
risk of developing superior mesenteric artery syndrome
(SMA) with the loss of the mesenteric fat pads.
Bone Health
Sheridan (26) recently reported more than 50% of
adults with disabilities (including CP) had low bone
mineral density (BMD). Table 5 lists risk factors for
low BMD in individuals with CP. Clinicians should
ensure adequate calcium and vitamin D intake, with
supplementation as needed to meet the DRI for these
nutrients (28). Vitamin D supplementation should be
started when a deficiency is evident by assessing
serum levels of 25(OH)-D. Shinchuk and Holick (29)
recommend supplementation if 25(OH)-D levels are
less than 30 ng/mL; however, the recent Institute of
Medicine (IOM) report recommends supplementation
only when 25(OH)-D levels are less than 20 ng/mL
(28). 25(OH)-D levels should be checked every three
months until levels are within normal range (30). 
NUTRITION MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING
Once a safe feeding route has been decided, feedings
may be started. The typical feeding pattern or schedule
can be obtained from either caregivers or medical
Table 5.  
Risk factors for Low Bone Mineral Density in CP26,27
• Feeding difficulties
• Prolonged immobilization
• Medications: antiepileptics, birth control medications, 
• Disordered puberty/growth retardation
glucocorticoids, magnesium/aluminum antacids
• Low weight z-scores
• Motor function/weight bearing status
• Calcium and vitamin D intake in diet
• Poor nutritional status
Table 6.  
Assessment of Feedings
I. Usual feeding patterns
a. PO intake vs. enteral feedings
II. Assess changes in intake/output
a. Feeding patterns, food selections, tolerance,
stooling
III. Assessment of safety and efficiency of usual 
feeding patterns/route
a. Growth trends in pediatrics, weight history in
adults

PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • FEBRUARY 2011
30
NUTRITION ISSUES IN GASTROENTEROLOGY, SERIES #92
Nutritional Assessment and Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
records. See Table 6 for feeding assessment questions.
Adjustments may need to be made based on current
medical status, such as postoperative status. Individu-
als that have been chronically undernourished can be
at a higher risk of refeeding syndrome. In clinical prac-
tice, clinicians have noted increased energy expendi-
ture resulting in growth failure or lack of weight gain
with oral feeding due to the length of time and effort to
eat. This should be considered when changing to
enteral or parenteral feedings, which may reduce
energy expenditure and result in rapid weight gain.
Adjustments to increase energy intake by 10–15%
with careful monitoring of weight and refeeding syn-
drome indicators in underweight or malnourished indi-
viduals has been well tolerated in clinical practice. 
Supplementation to meet the DRI for vitamins and
minerals may be required, particularly for hypometa-
bolic individuals on low calorie diets or enteral feed-
ings. Children who receive enteral feedings should be
on a product that best meets their nutrient needs with
minimal vitamin and mineral supplementation. This
may result in a pediatric formula for a teenage individ-
ual, or a higher protein, 1 kcal/mL formula for a ten
year old child undergoing complex spinal surgery.
Table 7 has monitoring guidelines and Table 8 lists
clinical pearls for use in individuals with developmen-
tal disabilities.
CONCLUSION
The variable nature of CP, in addition to urgent medical
issues, can present challenges to dietitians unfamiliar
with this diagnosis. During a nutrition assessment,
ensure accurate and consistent anthropometric mea-
surements, appropriately determinate energy, protein,
fluid and micronutrient needs, and consider dysmotility
and spinal anomalies. Careful monitoring and adjust-
ments to ensure optimal nutrient intake can help opti-
mize health in individuals with CP.
References
1. Ekvall SW, Ekvall VK, editors. Pediatric Nutrition in Chronic
Diseases and Developmental Disorders, 2nd edition. Oxford Uni-
versity Press; 2005. 
2. Yang Y, Lucas B, Feucht S, editors. Nutrition Interventions for
Children with Special Health Care Needs, 3rd edition. Washing-
ton State Department of Health; 2010.
(continued on page 32)
Table 7.
Monitoring in the Acute Care Setting
Parameter
Frequency
Height
Upon admission (monthly in pediatrics)
Weight
Weekly 
Skinfold measurements
Twice monthly
Laboratory measurements
Dependent on admission diagnosis, medications, treatment modalities
Oral intake/Enteral feedings 
Monitor tolerance daily until stable/well tolerated; then per facility protocol
Table 8.  
Nutrition Pearls for Individuals 
with Developmental Disabilities 
1. A visual assessment is very important, consider what
is “typical” for the diagnosis(es).
2. Consider all possible contributors to energy needs,
including:  mobility status, respiratory status, and
muscle tone.
3. Screen for dysphagia to determine a safe feeding
route.
4. Screen for motility issues, including GERD and 
constipation/diarrhea—“what goes in must come
out”.
5. Assess drug/nutrient interactions, such as the effect
of seizure medications and birth control medications
on bone health.
6. Ensure adequate protein and micronutrient intake,
especially in hypometabolic or hypocalorically-fed
individuals.

PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • FEBRUARY 2011
32
3. Council on Children with Disabilities. Care coordination in the
medical home: Integrating health and related systems of care for
children with special health care needs. Pediatrics 2005; 116:1238-
1244.
4. Detsky AS, McLaughlin JR, Baker JP, et al. What is subjective
global assessment of nutritional status? J Parent Ent Nutr 1987;
11:8-13.
5. Tobin S, Greis SM, Cheng V, et al. The role of an interdisciplinary
feeding team in the assessment and treatment of feeding problems.
Building Block for Life Newsletter. 2005; 28(3):1-11. 
6. Canda A. Stature estimation from body segment lengths in young
adults. Application to people with physical disabilities. J Physiol
Anthropol 2009; 28:71-82.
7. Koop SE. Scoliosis in cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol 2009;
51(Suppl. 4):92-98.
8. Spender QW, Cronk CE, Charney EB, Stallings VA. Assessment of
linear growth of children with cerebral palsy: Use of alternative mea-
sures to height or length. Dev Med Child Neurol 1989; 31:206-214.
9. Samson-Fang LJ, Stevenson RD. Identification of malnutrition in
children with cerebral palsy: poor performance of weight-for-
height centiles. Dev Med Child Neurol 2000; 42:162-168.
10. Stallings VA, Cronk CE, Zemel BS, Charney EB. Body composi-
tion in children with spastic quadriplegic cerebral palsy. J Pediatr
1995; 126:833-839.
11. Kuperminc MN, Gurka MJ, Bennis JA, et al. Anthropometric mea-
sures:  poor predictors of body fat in children with moderate to
severe cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol 2010; 52:824-830.
12. Ohata K, Tsuboyama T, Haruta T, Ichihashi N, Nakamura T. Lon-
gitudinal change in muscle and fat thickness in children and ado-
lescents with cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol 2009;
51:943-948.
13. Centers for Disease Control. 2000 CDC Clinical Growth Charts.
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts. Accessed Novem-
ber 3, 2010.
14. Hamwi, G. Changing dietary concepts. In: Danowski TS, ed. Dia-
betes Mellitus: Diagnosis and Treatment. New York, NY: Ameri-
can Diabetes Association, 1964.
15. Frisancho AR. New norms of upper limb fat and muscle areas for
assessment of nutritional status. Am J Clin Nutr 1981; 34:2540-2545.
16. Culley WJ, Middleton TO. Caloric requirements of mentally
retarded children with and without motor dysfunction. J Pediatr
1969; 75:380-4.
17. Dickerson RN, Brown RO, Gervasio JG, et al. Measured energy
expenditure of tube-fed patients with severe neurodevelopmental
disabilities. J Am Coll Nutr 1999; 18:61-68.
18. Vernon-Roberts A, Wells J, Grant H, et al. Gastrostomy feeding in
cerebral palsy: enough and no more. Dev Med Child Neurol Epub
2010 Oct 21. 
19. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat,
Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press; 2002/2005.
20. Holliday MA, Segar WE. The maintenance need for water in par-
enteral fluid therapy. Pediatrics 1957; 19:823-832.
21. Adolph EF. The metabolism and distribution of water in body and
tissues. Physiol Rev 1933; 13:336-363.
22. Sullivan PB, McIntyre E. Gastrointestinal problems in disabled
children. Current Pediatrics 2005; 15:347-353.
23. Fung EB, Samson-Fang L, Stallings VA, et al. Feeding dysfunction
is associated with poor growth and health status in children with
cerebral palsy. J Am Diet Assoc 2002; 102:361-368, 373.
24. Chadwick DD, Joliffe J. A descriptive investigation of dysphagia
in adults with intellectual disabilities. J Intellect Disabil Res 2009;
53:29-43.
25. Veugelers R, Benninga MA, Calis EA, et al. Prevalence and clini-
cal presentation of constipation in children with severe generalized
cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol 2010; 52:e216-e221.
26. Sheridan KJ. Osteoporosis in adults with cerebral palsy. Dev Med
Child Neurol 2009; 51(Suppl. 4):38-51.
27. Cohen M, Lahat E, Bistritzer T, et al. Evidence-based review of
bone strength in children and youth with cerebral palsy. J Child
Neurol 2009; 24:959-967.
28. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washing-
ton, DC: National Academy Press; 2011.
29. Shinchuk L, Holick MF. Vitamin D and rehabilitation: improving
functional outcomes. Nutr Clin Pract 2007; 22:297-304.
30. Wagner CL, Greer FR; Section on Breastfeeding and Committee on
Nutrition. Prevention of rickets and vitamin D deficiency in infants,
children, and adolescents. Pediatrics 2008; 122:1142-1152.
NUTRITION ISSUES IN GASTROENTEROLOGY, SERIES #92
Nutritional Assessment and Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
(continued from page 30)
CALL FOR PAPERS
ANNOUNCING AN EXCITING 
NEW DIRECTION FOR 
PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY 
We are launching a new series on original 
digestive diseases research. Research can be
prospective or retrospective as well as clinical in
nature. Outcomes or population based research is
also welcome. Please provide a cover letter that
briefly summarizes the important aspects of the
manuscript with recommendations for up to three
reviewers who are qualified in the field as well 
as three reviewers who may have a conflict of
interest with your study. Please send manuscripts
electronically to Dr. Uma Sundaram, attention
Cristin Murphy (telephone: 304.293.4123) to the
following e-mail address: camurphy@hsc.wvu.edu
PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY
R E P R I N T S
R E P R I N T S
Visit our website at www.practicalgastro.com
